# PermissionHelper

## What is PermissionsHelper!?
- Pulls info and creates a big JSON of all the permissions in an org.
- Works great for small to mid-sized orgs!
- Very Large Orgs work, but it can take an extended amount of time if you have:
  - A large number of Users/Groups.
  - A large number of Projects. 
  - A large history (we do not clean up ACES so we have to pull, process and discard disabled ones).
  - Many deleted objects (projects, groups, repos etc.) for the same reason as above.

## Requirements:
- PCA access in org 
  - I've made an effort to handle issues where you do not have permissions to see something, but I cannot say for sure that I have caught all possible permissions issues you might hit. if you are not a PC, you are getting a best effort.
- Sufficient System Memory to hold sections of information as they are pulled can be a Gb.
- Sufficient disk space to copy information locally, for large orgs this can be multiple Gbs.
- The script is designed to keep you under the Throttle limits, but Basic + Test Plan may help if you see a lot of issues.

## How to Use:
- Run the script if you do not have AZ CLI it will install it.
- Login at the prompt (usually top left corner of main screen), it may pop up under other windows.
- Choose your subscription.
- Script will get a token, and begin starting separate threads to pull info.
- Once the token is aquired you will be able to use it until expired without the previous steps.
- Threads will update the main screen (no mutex so it can be a little messy).
- When complete there will be multiple files in the ./data folder.
- Errors, including tarpits and blocking are saved to the error.log file.
- The files generated by the script will be zipped in a timestamped file.
  - The permissions_readable.json will stay in the folder and in the zip.
  - The Error.log will stay in the folder not in the zip.

## To Dos:

### Need Investigations:
- Resolve Service Accounts and Service Principals Ids.
  - We may need to go to GraphAPI for this.
- Resolve Workspace Tokens.
  - Seems like this is associated with VS Profile.
- Service Endpoints APis seem not to give all results.
  - May need to add a lookup in the convert-permissions like we did for some OOB group SIDs.

### Stretch Goals
- Config to let you control what you are trying to look up more granularly.
- Wire up inheritance chains
- Investigate feasability of per project runs (though we may still have to pull full Identities, groups etc for this to work.)
- Configurable or adaptable Thread pool sizes for best experience.